okay let's get it straight from the
get-go
all water is already salty salt appears
in seas and oceans thanks to rivers
which bring minerals from land with them
rivers are considered fresh themselves
only because their levels of salinity
are much lower
movement doesn't allow salt to collect
and rains replenish them with fresh
water
so technically what we drink is not
exactly fresh
there's some salt in that water anyway
but if for some reason all the water in
the world became much saltier
we'd be in big trouble
this is the dead sea the level of salt
here is much higher than in
any other reservoir on the planet
there's so much of it that water would
keep you afloat without any effort
but this curious effect is the only
positive thing about it
because almost no life is possible in
such conditions
only the sturdiest of bacteria can
survive here there's no fish no marine
mammals
and no sea birds over the lake surface
needless to say
if there was this much salt in every
water body in the world
complex life would have never appeared
in the first place
[Music]
generally though the level of salinity
in the ocean is about 10 times lower
than that in the dead sea
that's cool enough for marine life but
land animals bodies including us humans
can't process even this amount of salt
in the water
chemically salt consists of sodium and
chlorine
and both these elements are part of our
bodies but they're in a very fine
balance and if there's too much or too
little of either
we'll have health issues for one
salt keeps the liquid from escaping the
body that's why for example
you might not like your reflection in
the mirror in the morning after eating
too much salty food the night before
the salt naturally makes you thirsty you
drink more
and the sodium chloride already in your
body doesn't let it out
so your face is all puffy high levels of
salt in your diet may lead to blood
pressure increase
and that results in major health
problems
two just like i said salt makes you
thirsty
which is a signal from your body that
there's not enough water to wash away
the salt
your kidneys can only process so much
salt and
if there's too much of it water is
retained to deal with it
but the thing is it only works with
fresh water if you drink salt water
you'll feel even thirstier than before
because the amount of sodium in it is
much
more than water can wash out
and yet no fresh water doesn't mean no
life at all
after all marine animals fish and algae
would still thrive in salt water
but there would be neither land animals
nor land plants that take fresh water
from underground
sources the whole process of evolution
would have taken
an entirely different route ancestors of
today's land animals
would probably stayed in the water and
never set foot on dry land
because they wouldn't have been able to
drink we would have never evolved into
what we are today either
most probably sentient life would still
have appeared
yet not on land but in water the
difficulty is in that the ancient
primates had limbs that allowed them to
use tools and make new ones
which led to more and more sophisticated
inventions
underwater developing arms and hands
would be unnecessary
animals need fins and flippers to swim
fast and catch prey
or get away from predators if they only
had hind limbs suited for swimming
they'd be slower and lose to more agile
species
experiments show that dolphins for
example have a very high level of
intelligence
so they might have just occupied the top
of the food chain instead of humans
still unable to use handmade equipment
their cognitive development would have
stopped
or at least slowed down significantly
civilization would have appeared much
later if ever
and as crazy as it sounds merv folk
would likely have been the only ones to
bring it about
mer people would have had powerful tails
with big fins
but their torsos wouldn't have looked
like humans more likely
they would have sleek bodies much like
dolphins allowing them to push through
the water with ease
they would have also had arms and hands
like humans to operate tools
but with membranes between fingers to be
able to swim more efficiently
finally they would have probably had
developed gills to be able to breathe
underwater without having to go to the
surface every once in a while
like marine mammals do their cities
would have looked like something from a
sci-fi
movie too physics works differently
underwater
and on the surface because water
pressure and resistance are much higher
than those of air
if you ever tried slamming home a nail
with a hammer underwater
you certainly know what i'm talking
about so to be able to work with
many of the tools we're used to merfolk
would have to be several times stronger
than we are
they wouldn't be able to use fire either
obviously so
they'd probably develop a way to use hot
springs to power their machines at a
later stage of civilization
underwater currents would help with that
as well also
salt water is a very good electric
conductor so
mer people would likely to be able to
electrify their homes in cities
without the need for copper wire or they
could use bioluminescence instead
there are a lot of deep dwelling
creatures and plants that use this
method to navigate in the abyss
so our alternative humans could use them
to their advantage
another option would be for more people
to become cold-blooded
if that was the case they would have a
very slow metabolism
allowing them to live for hundreds of
years just like greenland sharks
the lifespan of these creatures is about
400 years
they'd never be in a hurry not to waste
energy and they would definitely not be
mammals then
without the need for warmth merv folk
wouldn't waste time on heating their
homes or warm clothing
instead they'd concentrate on other
fields of science and industry
and their progress would likely be
booming in fact if underwater humans
evolved as
cold-blooded animals they would have
every chance to become much more
technologically advanced than we are
today
that said above the surface of the
oceans things would change
drastically as well with all water
turned to the salty kind
the land mass would transform into a
barren wasteland
no living thing would be able to survive
without drinking water
so instead of lush greenery all the
continents would only have stone and
sand deserts
or icy ones as in the case of antarctica
the atmosphere could go both ways either
colder or warmer
depending on how the life on earth
behaved no plants would mean much less
oxygen produced
but the lack of animals and especially
humans with their air pollution
would also decrease the amounts of co2
underwater life also produces both these
gases
so the temperature on the planet would
depend on the amounts that ocean
inhabitants generated
all in all the face of our planet would
be a very different one if all the water
on it was salty
but thankfully we have fresh water at
our disposal
so we'll never know what it's like to be
a myrrh human